Data science has garnered a great deal of hype.
But what exactly is data science?
Data science is a field of study that combines domain expertise,
programming skills, and knowledge of mathematics and
statistics to extract meaningful insights from data.
For our purposes, we will consider the field of data science to include data analytics,
artificial intelligence, and machine learning.
The first of these, data analytics,
is the science of analyzing raw data in order to
drive business processes and improve business outcomes.
Examples of data analytics projects include
creation of dashboards to track metrics critical to the company,
forecasting sales or other operational outcomes to help align resources to needs,
providing a 360 degree view of the customer,
and correlational analyses, such as when the degree of engagement increases,
so does lifetime customer value.
The second of these areas, artificial intelligence,
represents a class of algorithms that direct machines in
activities that mimic the cognition and action of humans.
Artificial intelligence has found a wide variety of uses in business.
Email spam filters have long served as an example of artificial intelligence.
AI provides opportunities for personalization of the customer experience,
and can predict customer service needs on aspects of the customer,
and even on tone and content of customer interactions on support calls.
Finally, in retail applications,
dynamic price optimization can provide a way for
real-time pricing based on changing customer and market trends.
Finally, Machine learning, often considered a subset of artificial intelligence,
is a family of statistical approaches that use modern statistics to find patterns,
classify outcomes, and make predictions using massive amounts of data.
Examples of machine learning are bound in business.
Traditional customer segmentation can be supported at
a much more granular level through machine learning based micro-segmentation.
Online ad targeting can be supported with machine learning,
especially to optimize the bidding process.
Machine learning techniques form the basis for
recommending products on online retail sites,
and can provide predictions of purchases and other customer behavior.
Finally, machine learning techniques can aid in pattern and image recognition,
which can be helpful in contexts varying as widely as identifying
manufacturing defects and recognizing new product and service opportunities.